<!--
 Copyright 2025 ISAE-SUPAERO, https://www.isae-supaero.fr/en/
 Copyright 2021 IRT Saint Exupéry, https://www.irt-saintexupery.com

 This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
 International License. To view a copy of this license, visit
 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ or send a letter to Creative
 Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.
-->

(sec-paper-demand)=

# Air traffic demand

In order to account for the phases of growth, maturation and saturation observed in
aviation demand {cite:p}`vedantham_aircraft_1994`, a generalized logistic function is
used to estimate trend per-capita demand from per-capita income. This model explicitly
accounts for saturation of per-capita transport demand as per-capita incomes grow,
differently to the approach in most IAMs, which rely on extrapolations
{cite:p}`franz_wide_2022` or assumptions of constant income elasticity
{cite:p}`kim_gcam_2006,gcam-2019`.

```{figure} ../figures/figs/rpk_ssps.png
:name: fig-global-demand
:width: 100%

Historical evolution and modeled future global RPK demand from socioeconomic drivers
linked to SSP scenarios. Results are compared with {cite:p}`franz_wide_2022`.
Explicitly incorporating per-capita demand saturation (current model) yields much
lower traffic levels in the long term, when compared with models based on the
extrapolation of short term income elasticities.
```

{numref}`fig-global-demand` shows the recent history and SSP scenario future evolution
of Population and GDP per capita, and also the recent history and modeled future
global RPK demand. SSP2 follows the historically calibrated logistic function, demand
grows with varying pace due to income growth, but stabilizing at around 3000
passenger-kilometers per capita. SSP1 displays high initial growth due to income, but
stabilizes demand sooner and 90 % lower than trend; while for SSP5 growth is sustained
at even higher pace, and stabilize at much higher levels of around 4300
passenger-kilometers per capita, 50 % higher than trend. For comparison, crossing
AeroSCOPE {cite:p}`salgas_aeroscope` and World Bank {cite:p}`world_bank` averaged 2019
traffic per capita for multiple countries: India is 198, China 902, Brazil 959,
**World 1377**, Japan 2669, France 3561, Germany 3718, and USA 6974.

As highlighted in the assessment by Frank *et al.* {cite:p}`franz_wide_2022` when
estimating demand there is also the need of endogenizing SSP narratives beyond
accounting for scenario-specific GDP and population growth, a proposition is also made
for incorporating **voluntary demand restraint** (for SSP1 scenarios) **or incentives**
(in SSP5 scenarios) as well as an extra policy measure of market-specific demand caps
for dealing with strict carbon budget constraints. Comparing these results with the
ones generated by the present work, SSP1 shows a very close agreement both in terms of
per-capita traffic as for total demand, SSP2 shows close agreement up until 2070,
after that the logistic model employed yields lower per-capita traffic than Franz's
model, with declining income elasticities. This disagreement is further intensified in
SSP5, even with the higher stabilization traffic levels.

## Detailed formulation

Many drivers can be linked to the growth in air traffic demand: population, disposable
income, trade volumes, fuel prices, urbanization {cite:p}`transport_managing_2003`.

```{math}
:label: eq-demand-gcam

D = \sigma Pop\ I^{\epsilon_I} p^{\epsilon_p}
```

Equation {eq}`eq-demand-gcam` presents the model used in the Global Change Analysis
Model (GCAM) {cite:p}`kim_gcam_2006,gcam-2019`, where $Pop$ is population, $I$ is
per-capita income, $p$ is ticket price, $\epsilon_{\upsilon}$ is the elasticity of
demand to variable $\upsilon$, and $\sigma$ is a calibration constant. Yet, there are
several issues with using constant elasticities for forecasting aviation demand over
long time-horizons. Meta-analyses categorize it as a luxury good and immature market
{cite:p}`gallet_elasticity_2014`, and post-COVID studies demonstrate how income
elasticities may change rapidly depending on the state of the business cycle (normal,
downturn, recovery) {cite:p}`hanson_elasticity_2022`.

In the context of general transportation, these models are also limited to account for
demand saturation as personal incomes rise, resulting in ever-growing demand volumes
as the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grows, and that by using S curves (Logistic,
Gompertz, or Richards sigmoid functions), to account for the income effect, can
produce better estimates for both developed and developing countries
{cite:p}`andrieu_modelling_2023`. This method was first applied for estimating
personal vehicle stocks from personal income {cite:p}`sommer_vehicle_2007`. Results
show that income elasticities can vary significantly as countries develop, but one
shortcoming of the model is ignoring the effect of prices in modifying the demand.

```{figure} ../figures/figs_models/dep_countries.png
:name: fig-regional-demand
:width: 90%

Regional calibration of registered carrier departures per capita as a generalized
logistic function of income per capita. Region code: GBR - United Kingdom, USA -
United States of America, EUU - European Union, BOL - Bolivia, BRA - Brazil, CHN -
China, IND - India. Data from {cite:p}`world_bank`.
```

In order to account for the phases of growth, maturation and saturation observed in
aviation demand {cite:p}`vedantham_aircraft_1994`, a generalized logistic function is
used to estimate trend per-capita demand from per-capita income. In Equation
{eq}`eq-demand-income`, $L$ and $R$ are the left and right asymptotes (personal
propensity to travel at $0$ and $\infty$ personal income), $\iota$ is the income per
capita at the inflection point, $B$ is the logistic growth rate, $C$ controls the
duration of the transition from $L$ to $R$, and $\nu$ controls near which asymptote
maximum growth occurs ($\nu=1$ would yield an logistic equation and $\nu\to0^+$ would
tend to a Gompertz function).

```{math}
:label: eq-demand-income

RPKpc_{trend}(t)= L + (R-L) \left( \frac{C}{C+\exp(-B(I(t)-\iota))} \right)^{1/\nu}
```

```{math}
:label: eq-demand-story

\frac{RPKpc_{story}(t)}{RPKpc_{trend}(t)}= 1 +
\frac{F_{SSP}}{1+\exp\left(- \frac{I(t)-2I_{2024}}{2I_{2024}}\right)}
```

```{math}
:label: eq-demand-total

RPK_{trend}(t)=Pop(t)\ RPKpc_{story}(t)
```

```{figure} ../figures/figs_models/calibration_WLD.png
:name: fig-global-calib
:width: 100%

Calibration of global per capita RPK demand as a generalized logistic function of per
capita GDP. Data from {cite:p}`world_bank,bergero_pathways_2023`.
```

The parameter set $\theta=(L, R, \iota, B, C, \nu)$ must be calibrated with historical
data. In {ref}`the regional calibration <fig-regional-demand>`, World Bank data
{cite:p}`world_bank` provided
for the demand (carrier departures), population, and income proxies on a regionalized
level. But as the traveled distance is highly important in determining total
emissions, in the present work, mitigation scenarios are driven by RPK demand,
therefore ICAO data was used and calibrated on a global level over the 1980-2019
period. COVID years were excluded from the calibration data, and its after-effects
were considered by assuming that by 2024 per capita traffic will reach 2019 levels,
this is achieved shifting the parameter $\iota$ by the gap in income per capita
between 2024 and 2019.

The coefficients were calibrated to minimize the 2-norm of the error, resulting in
error to data ratio[^error-ratio] of 10.6 %. This yields an R2 of 0.954 over the per
capita data, and 0.967 over the globally aggregated data, which was considered
sufficient for the global prospective analysis carried. {numref}`fig-global-calib`
shows how the calibrated model compares to historical data, the error distribution,
the resulting logistic function, and the global RPK time-series.

[^error-ratio]: $\left \| \mathbf{y_{model}-y_{data}} \right \|_2\ /\
    \left \| \mathbf{y_{data}} \right \|_2$

Besides the logistic trend calibrated based on historical relationships, scenario
narratives are further endogeneized by accounting a storyline multiplier factor to
trend demand ({eq}`eq-demand-story`), which is essentially another S-curve that goes
from 1 to $F_{SSP}$ with inflection at around 1.5 times 2024 income per capita. For
SSP scenarios 2, 3, and 4 $F_{SSP}=1$, meaning they will follow the historically
calibrated logistic function. For scenario 1, $F_{SSP}=0.9$ stabilizing demand 90 %
lower than trend; while for scenario 5 $F_{SSP}=1.5$.

The supply, in terms of ASK, is then estimated using Load Factor
({eq}`eq-load-factor`) that grows following a quadratic curve in time
{cite:p}`planes_simulation_2021` from 82.4 % in 2019 to 92 % in 2075.

```{math}
:label: eq-load-factor

LF(t) = RPK_{trend}(t) / ASK_{trend}(t)
```

## Reproduce these figures

The demand calibration and the SSP scenario projections are produced by the following
scripts:

```{eval-rst}
.. minigallery:: examples/models/demand/plot_*.py
```
